StackER: A novel SMILES-based stacked approach for the accelerated and efficient discovery of ERα and ERβ antagonists

The role of estrogen receptors (ERs) in breast cancer is of great importance in both clinical practice and scientific exploration. However, around 15-30% of those affected do not see benefits from the usual treatments owing to the innate resistance mechanisms, while 30-40% will gain resistance through treatments. In order to address this problem and facilitate community-wide efforts, machine learning (ML)-based approaches are considered one of the most cost-effective and large-scale identification methods. Herein, we propose a new SMILES-based stacked approach, termed StackER, for the accelerated and efficient identification of ERα and ERβ inhibitors. In StackER, we first established an up-to-date dataset consisting of 1,996 and 1,207 compounds for ERα and ERβ, respectively. Using the up-to-date dataset, StackER explored a wide range of different SMILES-based feature descriptors and ML algorithms in order to generate probabilistic features (PFs). Finally, the selected PFs derived from the two-step feature selection strategy were used for the development of an efficient stacked model. Both cross-validation and independent tests showed that StackER surpassed several conventional ML classifiers and the existing method in precisely predicting ERα and ERβ inhibitors. Remarkably, StackER achieved MCC values of 0.829-0.847 and 0.712-0.786 in terms of the cross-validation and independent tests, respectively, which were 5.92-8.29 and 1.59-3.45% higher than the existing method. In addition, StackER was applied to determine useful features for being ERα and ERβ inhibitors and identify FDA-approved drugs as potential ERα inhibitors in efforts to facilitate drug repurposing. This innovative stacked method is anticipated to facilitate community-wide efforts in efficiently narrowing down ER inhibitor screening.
